#CodeBook.md

##Data

### The experiments
The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years.
Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist.
Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually.
The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 
The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window).
The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity.
The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. 

### Dataset
The full data set that was generated by the experiments can be found here:
<https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip>
The script run_analysis can be applied on the data set to generate a new data set called tidyData.txt

##Variables
The data set tidyData.txt contains 88 variables.
**Activity** is a label that describes the type of activity that has been performed in the observation. 
**SubjectId** An identifier of the subject who carried out the experiment.
**Mean** followed by X,Y or Z: this variable shows the calculated mean over the measurement performed by all subjects
**Std**  followed by X,Y or Z: this variable shows the calculated standard deviation over the measurement performed by all subjects
**X**: measurement on X-axis
**Y**: measurement on Y-axis
**X**: measurement on Z-axis


Data is measured using a 3-axial accelerometer and a 3-axial gyroscope and stored in these variables:
tAcc-XYZ: readings from 3-axial accelerometer (X,Y,Z)
tGyro-XYZ: readings from 3-axial gyroscope (X,Y,Z)
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ: jerk signals from 3-axial accelerometer (X,Y,Z)
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ: jerk signals from 3-axial accelerometer (X,Y,Z)

Magnitude of the measured signals is calculated and stored in the following variables:
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag

Some of these signals have been transformed by Fast Fourier Transfrom.
These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:
gravityMean
tBodyAccMean
tBodyAccJerkMean
tBodyGyroMean
tBodyGyroJerkMean



##Scripting: Steps taken to transform data set into tidy data set tidyData.txt
* Step 1: The script downloads and unzips the source files into the current working directory.
* Step 2: It merges training data with test data into one Data Frame called **all**
* Step 3: The script selects measurements of mean and st.deviation from *all*, the result is that *all* only contains those measurements. 
* Step 4: The variables names are changed to reflect the names in the **features** data set with variable names that correspond to the measurement names and applies a few changes to their layout to faciliate reading. Then it replaces the activity IDs by the corresponding activity namesfrom **activityLabels**.
* Step 5: A second, independent tidy data set containing the averabe of each variable for each activity and subject is generated, called **tidyData**. The script writes the tidy data set to a file named "tidyData.txt" in the current working directory
